README.md, before:

# CUDA-Demux

**CUDA-Demux** is a high-performance, GPU-accelerated tool for demultiplexing Illumina sequencing data from BCL/CBCL format to FASTQ files. It leverages CUDA for fast barcode matching and parallel processing.

## Features
- **GPU Acceleration**: Fast barcode matching using CUDA kernels
- **CBCL Support**: Native support for compressed BCL (CBCL) files from NovaSeq and NextSeq platforms
- **Multi-threaded**: Parallel BCL/CBCL file parsing and decompression
- **Dual Indexing**: Support for single and dual-indexed libraries
- **High Performance**: Process billions of reads efficiently

## Repository
The code is hosted on GitHub at: [https://github.com/mmorri/cuda-demux](https://github.com/mmorri/cuda-demux).

## Installation
### Prerequisites
- CUDA Toolkit 11.0 or later
- CMake 3.16 or later
- A C++17-compatible compiler (GCC 7+ or Clang 5+)
- NVIDIA GPU with compute capability 5.2 or higher
- zlib development libraries
- OpenMP support

### Build Instructions
1. Clone the repository:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/mmorri/cuda-demux.git
   cd cuda-demux
   ```
2. Create a build directory:
   ```bash
   mkdir build
   cd build
   ```
3. Configure the project with CMake:
   ```bash
   cmake .. -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release
   ```
4. Compile the tool:
   ```bash
   make -j$(nproc)
   ```
5. Verify the binary is created:
   ```bash
   ls cuda-demux
   ```

## Usage

```bash
./cuda-demux --input <RUN_FOLDER> --samplesheet <SAMPLESHEET.CSV> --output <OUTPUT_FOLDER>
```

### Arguments

- `--input`: Path to the Illumina run folder containing the Data/Intensities/BaseCalls directory
- `--samplesheet`: Path to the CSV file with sample information and barcode mappings
- `--output`: Path to the directory where FASTQ files will be generated

### Example

```bash
./cuda-demux \
  --input /path/to/NovaSeqX_Run \
  --samplesheet /path/to/SampleSheet.csv \
  --output /path/to/output
```

## Input Requirements

### Run Folder Structure
The tool expects a standard Illumina run folder structure:
```
Run_Folder/
├── RunInfo.xml
├── RunParameters.xml
├── SampleSheet.csv
└── Data/
    └── Intensities/
        └── BaseCalls/
            └── L001/
                ├── C1.1/
                │   ├── L001_1.cbcl
                │   └── L001_2.cbcl
                ├── C2.1/
                └── ...
```

### Sample Sheet Format
The sample sheet should follow the Illumina format with sections for:
- `[Header]` - Run metadata
- `[Reads]` - Read structure
- `[BCLConvert_Data]` - Sample barcode mappings

Example:
```csv
[Header]
FileFormatVersion,2
RunName,MyRun
InstrumentPlatform,NextSeq1k2k

[Reads]
Read1Cycles,151
Read2Cycles,151
Index1Cycles,10
Index2Cycles,10

[BCLConvert_Data]
Sample_ID,Index,Index2
Sample1,ATCGATCGAT,TAGCTAGCTA
Sample2,GCTAGCTAGC,CGATCGATCG
```

## Performance

The tool is optimized for:
- Large-scale sequencing runs (tested with >1 billion clusters)
- NovaSeq, NextSeq, and other Illumina platforms using CBCL format
- Multi-GPU systems (future enhancement)

### Benchmarks
- Processes ~10 million reads in minutes on a modern GPU
- Scales linearly with number of reads
- Memory usage depends on batch size and number of samples

## Limitations

- Currently processes reads in batches (default: 10M reads for testing)
- Requires sufficient GPU memory for barcode matching
- Output files are uncompressed FASTQ (gzip compression planned)

## Troubleshooting

1. **CUDA errors**: Ensure your GPU driver and CUDA toolkit are properly installed
2. **Memory issues**: Reduce batch size or ensure sufficient GPU memory
3. **File not found**: Verify the run folder structure matches Illumina standards

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please:
1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch
3. Make your changes
4. Submit a pull request

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Acknowledgments

- Uses tinyxml2 for XML parsing
- CUDA toolkit for GPU acceleration
- zlib for CBCL decompression

Commit message:

CLI: add GPU controls and docs\n\n- Flags: --batch-size, --gpu-mem-fraction, --device, --no-adaptive-probe.\n- Map to env vars for downstream modules.\n- Update README with advanced GPU controls and batching behavior.\n\nCUDA decode: in-loop OOM fallback + pinned async copies\n\n- Add in-loop allocation fallback (halve batch and retry).\n- Use cudaMemcpyAsync with a stream and pinned host buffers.\n- Gentle per-batch self-tuning using current free memory.

README.md, after:

# CUDA-Demux

**CUDA-Demux** is a high-performance, GPU-accelerated tool for demultiplexing Illumina sequencing data from BCL/CBCL format to FASTQ files. It leverages CUDA for fast barcode matching and parallel processing.

## Features
- **GPU Acceleration**: Fast barcode matching using CUDA kernels
- **CBCL Support**: Native support for compressed BCL (CBCL) files from NovaSeq and NextSeq platforms
- **Multi-threaded**: Parallel BCL/CBCL file parsing and decompression
- **Dual Indexing**: Support for single and dual-indexed libraries
- **High Performance**: Process billions of reads efficiently

## Repository
The code is hosted on GitHub at: [https://github.com/mmorri/cuda-demux](https://github.com/mmorri/cuda-demux).

## Installation
### Prerequisites
- CUDA Toolkit 11.0 or later
- CMake 3.16 or later
- A C++17-compatible compiler (GCC 7+ or Clang 5+)
- NVIDIA GPU with compute capability 5.2 or higher
- zlib development libraries
- OpenMP support

### Build Instructions
1. Clone the repository:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/mmorri/cuda-demux.git
   cd cuda-demux
   ```
2. Create a build directory:
   ```bash
   mkdir build
   cd build
   ```
3. Configure the project with CMake:
   ```bash
   cmake .. -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release
   ```
4. Compile the tool:
   ```bash
   make -j$(nproc)
   ```
5. Verify the binary is created:
   ```bash
   ls cuda-demux
   ```

## Usage

```bash
./cuda-demux --input <RUN_FOLDER> --samplesheet <SAMPLESHEET.CSV> --output <OUTPUT_FOLDER> [--gzip]

# Advanced GPU controls
  [--batch-size N]
  [--gpu-mem-fraction F]    # 0.05–0.95 fraction when cudaMemGetInfo unavailable
  [--device IDX]            # select CUDA device index
  [--no-adaptive-probe]     # disable allocation probing binary-search
```

### Arguments

- `--input`: Path to the Illumina run folder containing the Data/Intensities/BaseCalls directory
- `--samplesheet`: Path to the CSV file with sample information and barcode mappings
- `--output`: Path to the directory where FASTQ files will be generated

### Example

```bash
./cuda-demux \
  --input /path/to/NovaSeqX_Run \
  --samplesheet /path/to/SampleSheet.csv \
  --output /path/to/output
```

## Input Requirements

### Run Folder Structure
The tool expects a standard Illumina run folder structure:
```
Run_Folder/
├── RunInfo.xml
├── RunParameters.xml
├── SampleSheet.csv
└── Data/
    └── Intensities/
        └── BaseCalls/
            └── L001/
                ├── C1.1/
                │   ├── L001_1.cbcl
                │   └── L001_2.cbcl
                ├── C2.1/
                └── ...
```

### Sample Sheet Format
The sample sheet should follow the Illumina format with sections for:
- `[Header]` - Run metadata
- `[Reads]` - Read structure
- `[BCLConvert_Data]` - Sample barcode mappings

Example:
```csv
[Header]
FileFormatVersion,2
RunName,MyRun
InstrumentPlatform,NextSeq1k2k

[Reads]
Read1Cycles,151
Read2Cycles,151
Index1Cycles,10
Index2Cycles,10

[BCLConvert_Data]
Sample_ID,Index,Index2
Sample1,ATCGATCGAT,TAGCTAGCTA
Sample2,GCTAGCTAGC,CGATCGATCG
```

## Performance

The tool is optimized for:
- Large-scale sequencing runs (tested with >1 billion clusters)
- NovaSeq, NextSeq, and other Illumina platforms using CBCL format
- Multi-GPU systems (future enhancement)

### Benchmarks
- Processes ~10 million reads in minutes on a modern GPU
- Scales linearly with number of reads
- Memory usage depends on batch size and number of samples

## Limitations

- Currently processes reads in batches (default: 10M reads for testing)
- Requires sufficient GPU memory for barcode matching
- Output files are uncompressed FASTQ (gzip compression planned)

## GPU Memory Sizing and Batching

The decoder estimates a safe batch size from GPU memory. It prefers `cudaMemGetInfo`. If that call is not available in your environment, the tool falls back to `cudaGetDeviceProperties().totalGlobalMem` with a configurable working fraction.

- CLI overrides: `--batch-size`, `--gpu-mem-fraction`, `--device`, `--no-adaptive-probe`
- Env overrides (equivalents):
  - `CUDA_DEMUX_BATCH_SIZE`
  - `CUDA_DEMUX_MEM_FRACTION` (default 0.60 when `cudaMemGetInfo` is unavailable)
  - `CUDA_DEMUX_DEVICE`
  - `CUDA_DEMUX_NO_ADAPTIVE`

With adaptive probing (default), the tool validates the initial batch by attempting representative allocations and binary‑searching down on out‑of‑memory conditions. During streaming, if an allocation fails mid‑run, the batch is halved and retried automatically, keeping the process fully CUDA‑based.

## Troubleshooting

1. **CUDA errors**: Ensure your GPU driver and CUDA toolkit are properly installed
2. **Memory issues**: Reduce batch size or ensure sufficient GPU memory
3. **File not found**: Verify the run folder structure matches Illumina standards

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please:
1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch
3. Make your changes
4. Submit a pull request

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Acknowledgments

- Uses tinyxml2 for XML parsing
- CUDA toolkit for GPU acceleration
- zlib for CBCL decompression
